Add context doc (#1037)
lit/lit.dev: packages/lit-dev-content/site/docs/components/context.md

---
title: Context
eleventyNavigation:
  key: Context
  parent: Components
  order: 9
  labs: true
---

{% labs-disclaimer %}

Context is a way of making data available to entire component subtrees without having to manually bind properties to every component. The data is "contextually" available, such that ancestor elements in between a provider of data and consumer of data aren't event aware of it.

Lit's context implementation is part of [Lit Labs](/docs/libraries/labs/) and available in the `@lit-labs/context` package:

```bash
npm i @lit-labs/context
```

Context is useful for data that needs to be consumed by a wide variety and large number of components - things like an apps data store, the current user, a UI theme - or when data-binding isn't an option, such as when an element needs to provide data to its light DOM children.

> Context is very in ways to React's Context, or to dependency injection systems like Angular's, with some important differences that enable interoperability across different web components libraries, frameworks and plain JavaScript.

Reviewer: very *similar

## Example

Using context involves a _context object_ (sometimes called a key), a _provider_ and a _consumer_, which communicate using the context object.

Context definition (`logger-context.ts`):
```ts
import {createContext} from '@lit-labs/context';
import type {Logger} from 'my-logging-library';
export type {Logger} from 'my-logging-library';
export const loggerContext = createContext<Logger>('logger');
```

Provider:
```ts
import {LitElement, property, html} from 'lit';
import {provide} from '@lit-labs/context';

import {Logger} from 'my-logging-library';
import {loggerContext} from './logger-context.js';

@customElement('my-app')
class MyApp extends LitElement {

  @provide({context: loggerContext})
  logger = new Logger();

  render() {
    return html`...`;
  }
}
```

Consumer:
```ts
import {LitElement, property} from 'lit';
import {consume} from '@lit-labs/context';

> import {type Logger, loggerContext} from './logger.js';

Reviewer: Seems like this should be importing from `'./logger-context.js`

#### ContextConsumer

ContextConsumer is a reactive controller that manages dispatching the `context-request` event for you. The controller will cause the host element to update when new values are provided. The provided value is then available at the `.value` property of the controller.

```ts
import {LitElement, property} from 'lit';
import {ContextConsumer} from '@lit-labs/context';
import {Logger, loggerContext} from './logger.js';

export class MyElement extends LitElement {
  private _myData = new ContextConsumer(this, myContext);

  render() {
    const myData = this._myData.value;
    return html`...`;
  }
}
```

#### Subscribing to contexts

Consumers can subscribe to context values so that if a provider has a new value, it can give it to all subscribed consumers, causing them to update.

You can subscribe with the `@consume()` decorator:

```ts
  @consume({context: myContext, subscribe: true})
  myData: MyData;
```

and the ContextConsumer controller:

```ts
  private _myData = new ContextConsumer(this,
    myContext,
    undedined, /* callback */
    true /* subscribe */
  );
```

> ## Example Use Cases

Author: thanks!

### Current user, locale, etc.

The most common context use cases involve data that is global to a page and possibly only sparsely needed in components throughout the page. Without context it's possible that most or all components would need to accept and propagate reactive properties for the data.

### Services

App-global services, like loggers, analytics, data stores, can be provided by context. An advantage of context over importing from a common module are the late coupling and tree-scoping that context provides. Tests can easily provide mock services, or different parts of the page can be given different service instances.

### Themes

Themes are sets of styles that apply to the entire page or entire subtrees within the page - exactly the kind of scope of data that context provides.

One way of building a theme system would be to define a `Theme` type that containers can provide that holds named styles. Elements that want to apply a theme can consume the theme object and look up styles by name. Custom theme reactive controllers can wrap ContextProvider and ContextConsumer to reduce boilerplate.

### HTML-based plugins

> Context can be used to provide data to light DOM children, which typically aren't created from the same declarative templates with databinding available.

Reviewer 2: I know what you mean here, but it's hard to phrase in an understandable way.

Maybe
```suggestion
Context can be used to pass data from a parent to its light DOM children. Since the parent does not create the children, it cannot leverage template-based data-binding to pass data to its children, but can listen to and respond to `context-request` events.
```

For example, consider a code editor element with plugins for different language modes. You can make a plain HTML system for adding features using context:

```html
<code-editor>
  <code-editor-javascript-mode></code-editor-javascript-mode>
  <code-editor-python-mode></code-editor-python-mode>
</code-editor>
```

> In this case `<code-editor>` would provide an API for adding langage modes via context, and plugin elements would consume that API and add themselves to the editor.

Reviewer 2: I don't super love this example; it's definitely valid, but could we choose one where both are visual (rather than the headless/utility element example)?

Author: I think because we're not showing anything visual, that this might be easier to understand.

It is a case a came across a few times actually, where an editor maintainer said they didn't see the value in custom elements because you had to configure the editor in JS anyway.

### Data formatters, link generators, etc.

> Sometimes reusable components will need to format data or URLs in an application-specific way. For example, a documentation viewer that renders a link to another item. The component will not know the URL space of the application.

Reviewer 2: 😉

Author: it's a great example!

In these cases the component can depend on a context-provided function that will apply the application-specific formatting to the data or link.

## API

<div class="alert alert-info">

These API docs are a summary until generated API docs are available

</div>

### `createContext()`

Creates a typed Context object

**Import**:

```ts
import {property} from '@lit-labs/context';
```

**Signature**:

```ts
function createContext<ValueType, K = unknown>(key: K): Context<K, ValueType>;
```

Contexts are compared with with strict equality.

> If you want two separate `createContext()` calls to referer to the same context, then use a key that will by equal under strict equality like a string for `Symbol.for()`:

Author: I reworked this a bit. Hopefully it's a bit more clear.

#### Context type-checking

`createContext()` takes any value and returns it directly. In TypeScript, the value is cast to a typed `Context` object, which carries the type of the context _value_ with it.

In case of a mistake like this:
```ts
const myContext = createContext<Logger>(Symbol('logger'));

class MyElement extends LitElement {
  @provide({context: myContext})
  name: string
}
```

TypeScript will warn that the type `string` is not assignable to the type `Logger`.

#### Context equality

Context objects are used by providers to match a context request event to a value. Contexts are compared with with strict equality (`===`), so a provider will only handle a context request if its context key equals the context key of the request.

This means that there are two main ways to create a context object:
1. With a value that is globally unique, like an object (`{}`)  or symbol (`Symbol()`)
2. With a value that is not globally unique, so that it can be equal under strict equality, like a string (`'logger'`) or _global_ symbol (`Symbol.for('logger')`).

> If you want two _separate_ `createContext()` calls to referrer to the same

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you want two _separate_ `createContext()` calls to refer to the same
```

Reviewer 3: 👋 
Just dropping in to say hi and correct a typo for old time's sake 😂 ... Apparently I haven't turned off my GitHub notifications yet ...
